How to know if your AI agents actually
work?
When you're building AI agents, the
hardest part isn't getting them to work.
It's knowing whether they actually do.
You spend time building your agent, you
test it yourself, maybe [snorts] with a
few different scenarios, and things look
good.
So, you ship it. But, running it and
checking the output isn't the same as
knowing it works.
There's a specific practice that's
emerged for exactly this. It's called
evals, and it works differently than the
testing you already know.
Agents don't fail in the same way that
deterministic software fails.
Things can seem fine when in fact they
are not.
The output can look correct, the logs
can look clean,
but the agent made the wrong decision
somewhere in the middle.
Running it a few times and checking the
output will catch the obvious problems,
but it won't tell you whether the agent
is making good decisions, and that's a
harder problem to solve.
Unit tests are built around one
assumption.
Given the same input, you'll get the
same output every time.
>> [snorts]
>> Agents don't work that way.
Integration tests assume predictable
interfaces, but an agent's interface is
natural language. There's no schema to
assert against.
End-to-end tests assume a fixed happy
path.
An agent might take three steps or 25 to
reach the same goal.
The natural instinct is to reach for
testing tools you already know. The
problem is those tools weren't built for
this kind of system.
So, they don't fit, what does?
The word eval sounds like grading, and
grading sounds like a pass or fail. But,
that's not quite what this is.
You can think of it more like a
manufacturing QA. You don't test one
widget at a time. You sample the batch
and measure the defect rate over time.
An eval works the same way. It scores on
a spectrum, zero to one,
across dozens or even hundreds of
inputs.
A response could be 0.7 correct. You're
not asking, "Did it pass?" You're
tracking whether quality is holding,
improving, or degrading across every
change that you make.
That's essentially what evals are, CI
for probabilistic systems.
In practice, three things make this
work.
First, you start with a benchmark set, a
curated collection of inputs with known
good reference outputs. Next is scoring
functions, automated judges that
evaluate each response against your
criteria.
Lastly, there's tracking over time. You
look at trends rather than snapshots.
That's the framework, but what
specifically do you score?
There are four layers to think about,
from the component level all the way up
to the system level.
The first is the component layer, your
tools and functions.
These are deterministic. You can test
them normally with unit tests. A tool
that parses JSON either parses it
correctly or it doesn't. Your existing
testing instincts can work fine here.
The second is trajectory. Did the agent
take the right steps?
Did it select the right tools, construct
the right parameters, follow a
reasonable reasoning chain?
An agent that gets the right answer in
25 tool calls when three would do has a
trajectory problem. And an agent that
calls the wrong tool but happens to get
the right answer, that's also a
trajectory problem, but it will likely
become an outcome problem.
>> [snorts]
>> The third layer is the outcome.
Is the final answer from the agent
correct, helpful, grounded, and
complete?
This is the hardest layer to evaluate
because those questions are subjective.
You can't write an assertion for
helpful.
That's where LLM as judge comes in. The
idea is straightforward. You use second
language model to evaluate your agent's
output. You give it a set of criteria
that defines what a good answer looks
like for this task, and it scores each
response against that rubric.
The division of labor here is humans
define what good means. The model
applies that definition at scale.
You get the judgment of a careful
reviewer without the cost of reviewing
everything manually.
That said, automated evals don't catch
everything.
Regularly reading the production traces
directly, reading the actual inputs and
outputs, surfaces the subtle failures
that no rubric has anticipated.
The fourth layer is system monitoring,
watching for quality degrading in
production at scale.
Not individual failures, but patterns
across real usage over time.
This [snorts] is where evals
observability start to overlap, and it's
where the next video will pick up.
There's a specific order to how to use
these layers. You want to start from the
outside in.
Start with the outcome. If it fails, you
open the box. But, even when it passes,
trajectory is worth monitoring. An agent
that takes 25 steps when three would do
is leaving efficiency and reliability
problems on the table.
Now, the layers tell you where to
measure, but they don't tell you what
quality actually means.
For that, there are four dimensions.
Effectiveness, did the agent achieve
what the user actually wanted? That's
the baseline.
Efficiency, did it do it well?
There's a real difference between 25
tool calls and three, between 10 seconds
and two minutes. And token costs add up
fast when your agent is taking
unnecessary steps.
Robustness, does it hold up under
pressure? Malformed input, API failures,
ambiguous instructions, and edge cases.
And lastly, safety and alignment. Does
it stay within the bounds? Does it
refuse to do things when it should
refuse? That one's a non-negotiable.
Which brings up the real challenge. You
can only measure what you can see.
You can't measure effectiveness if you
only see the final answer.
You can't measure efficiency if you
don't count the steps. You can't
diagnose a robustness failure if you
don't know which API call failed.
Quality requires visibility into what
the agent is actually doing.
And that visibility has to be designed
in, not added later.
>> [snorts]
>> Most teams build the agent, ship it, and
then ask, "How do we test this?" That's
the wrong order.
If your agent doesn't emit structured
traces, you can't evaluate trajectory.
If it doesn't log tool calls with
parameters, you can't measure
efficiency.
If it doesn't expose intermediate
reasoning, you can't diagnose failures.
Designing this from the start is an
architectural decision. The same way
that observability and security is. You
build it from day one.
Design the agent so quality is
measurable, then measure it
continuously.
There's one more dimension to this.
What happens over time?
Every production failure is a data
point. When you capture it and annotate
it, it becomes a regression test.
The pattern looks like this.
Production failures surface problems.
You annotate them as eval cases. The
eval set grows, and the agent improves.
New edge cases surface, and you repeat.
The eval set becomes a living record of
everything your agent has struggled
with, real failures, real edge cases,
real user interactions that didn't go
well.
Over time, it's the most accurate
picture you have of what your agent
actually needs to handle.
You don't build quality in one pass. You
build it incrementally, and it
compounds.
To recap,
evals aren't tests. They're a way of
measuring quality over time using scores
and distributions rather than a simple
pass or fail.
Agent quality has four layers and four
dimensions. You measure from the outside
in.
And quality is something you design for
from day one, not something that you add
after the fact.
If you want to know where your system
actually stands, I put together a
one-page scorecard based on the four
layers we've covered. Score yourself on
each one, and you'll know exactly where
your gaps are. Link is in the
description.
The next video in this series covers
observability, traces, metrics, and what
it looks like when you can actually see
inside a running agent.
And if you found this useful, subscribe
so you don't miss the next one.
In the meantime, you can find more
videos on building AI agents here.